Negative feedback can be tough to deal with sometimes. Sometimes it’s painful to be rejected and it takes some time to get used to it. We can always choose how we act, and while we shouldn’t allow our feelings to take over how we behave, we shouldn’t try to shut them off entirely.

The first step is to pause and not react immediately. Keep calm and avoid falling to a victim mindset. Assess the feedback objectively to see if it’s true or not.

Some people have good intentions, they care about you and want to point out some issues that you could improve on or opportunities for growth. It’s good to hear different perspectives.

Some critiques trigger emotional responses in you and you might want to know why you feel that way. Maybe because of your culture, values and priorities in life. Painful events can trigger feelings from the past. You should remember your qualities and reinforce the positive aspects of your behavior or work.

If you think about it, most rejections are insignificant to your life. Just casual observers who make snap decisions and barely pay attention. Don’t beat yourself up. Move on to your next lead and forget about it.

Once you start getting feedback more often it’s a slippery slope until it becomes bullying or hate speech. Then you can rest assured the person is not worth your time. Some people survive just by dissing on others and promoting themselves.

Verbal abuse can be classified as threats, taunting, name calling, rudeness. Other times they can be passive-aggressive and you need to confront the issue and hold them accountable for their behavior.

Be assertive and clear that you won’t let them cross the line, call them out for their lack of care and ask them to justify their opinion or present evidence.

We tend to project our fears to certain characters in our lives. You should be clear about your relationship with this person and identify similar people that you have met in your life and friends in common. You should see beyond stereotypes.

If you’re having trouble with processing some conversations, remember that thoughts are not a reflection of you and what people are saying doesn’t really represent your character. People talk all the time and they don’t really mean what they say. It shouldn’t affect your self-esteem.