The house always wins. Most people can confirm from their own experience. But nevertheless a set of people constantly come to the casino to play and voluntarily leave their money!

It's pleasant and comfortable for a client in the casino. He gets free-of-charge drinks and snacks due to the casino. He sits in comfortable armchairs and listens to pleasant music. Nothing disturbs him. There are not clocks in the casino, as a rule. Therefore it is rather difficult to define the time.

But everywhere there is a lot of day sunlight. Bright light confuses players. These are psychological tricks. The purpose of them is to disorient the persons sense.

The effect of almost winning a prize forces the player to overestimate the chances of victory. Players overestimate their ability to keep the control over the situation. They think that they are able to stop precisely when it is necessary.

Such human self-confidence is familiar to everyone and similar to the statement of the category I can stop an addiction when I want. Why should I stop, when the red has already dropped out 5 times successively (at the rate on black)? Especially if you have spent all the money to make the following certainly advantageous rate!

Almost in all casinos draws of automobiles are carried out! The person takes out judgments about events and world around not only from the rational facts — the emotional component, images and impressions influence the perception very much. And emotional images are, as a rule, very strong!

The casino in addition forms emotional images of advantages by leading the indicative super-draws, exposing remembered prizes on the draw, whenever possible showing the gaining players and making you think any average joe can win an expensive automobile!

The player is willing to take some risk and we’re led to believe the results are random and unknown but nothing could be more calculated in the casino. They define the limits so the bets are not too big. The casino spends more on maintenance and things outside the game.

Such are the unwritten rules of gambling business. But it is just a reflection of the nature of human behavior. To resist these impulses is practically impossible. To beat the casino is very difficult too. The appetite for games has deep roots in our mind and it forces millions of people to lose in hope for a prize.